CHAPTER 12: CHANNELS

LESSON 1:
Concurrency
Click to show video
What Is Concurrency?
Concurrency is the ability to perform multiple tasks at the same time. Typically, our code is executed one line at a time, one after the other. This is called sequential execution or synchronous execution.



If the computer we're running our code on has multiple cores, we can even execute multiple tasks at exactly the same time. If we're running on a single core, a single core executes code at almost the same time by switching between tasks very quickly. Either way, the code we write looks the same in Go and takes advantage of whatever resources are available.

How Does Concurrency Work in Go?
Go was designed to be concurrent, which is a trait fairly unique to Go. It excels at performing many tasks simultaneously safely using a simple syntax.

There isn't a popular programming language in existence where spawning concurrent execution is quite as elegant, at least in my opinion.

Concurrency is as simple as using the go keyword when calling a function:

go doSomething()

In the example above, doSomething() will be executed concurrently with the rest of the code in the function. The go keyword is used to spawn a new goroutine.

Assignment
At Textio we send a lot of network requests. Each email we send must go out over the internet. To serve our millions of customers, we need a single Go program to be capable of sending thousands of emails at once.

Edit the sendEmail() function to execute its anonymous function concurrently so that the "received" message prints after the "sent" message.







LESSON 2:
Channels
Channels are a typed, thread-safe queue. Channels allow different goroutines to communicate with each other.

Create a Channel
Like maps and slices, channels must be created before use. They also use the same make keyword:

ch := make(chan int)

Send Data to a Channel
ch <- 69

The <- operator is called the channel operator. Data flows in the direction of the arrow. This operation will block until another goroutine is ready to receive the value.

Receive Data from a Channel
v := <-ch

This reads and removes a value from the channel and saves it into the variable v. This operation will block until there is a value in the channel to be read.

Reference Type
Like maps and slices, channels are reference types, meaning they are passed by reference by default.

func send(ch chan int) {
    ch <- 99
}

func main() {
    ch := make(chan int)
    go send(ch)
    fmt.Println(<-ch) // 99
}

Blocking and Deadlocks
A deadlock is when a group of goroutines are all blocking so none of them can continue. This is a common bug that you need to watch out for in concurrent programming.

Assignment
Run the program. You'll see that it deadlocks and never exits. The sendIsOld function is trying to send on a channel, but no other goroutines are running that can accept the value from the channel.
Fix the deadlock by spawning a goroutine to send the "is old" values.





LESSON 3:
Channels
In the previous lesson, we saw how we can receive values from channels like this:

v := <-ch

However, sometimes we don't care what is passed through a channel. We only care when and if something is passed. In that situation, we can block and wait until something is sent on a channel using the following syntax.

<-ch

This will block until it pops a single item off the channel, then continue, discarding the item.

In cases like this, Empty structs are often used as a unary value so that the sender communicates that this is only a "signal" and not some data that is meant to be captured and used by the receiver.

Here is an example:

func downloadData() chan struct{} {
	downloadDoneCh := make(chan struct{})

	go func() {
		fmt.Println("Downloading data file...")
		time.Sleep(2 * time.Second) // simulate download time

		// after the download is done, send a "signal" to the channel
		downloadDoneCh <- struct{}{}
	}()

	return downloadDoneCh
}

func processData(downloadDoneCh chan struct{}) {
	// any code here can run normally
	fmt.Println("Preparing to process data...")

	// block until `downloadData` sends the signal that it's done
	<-downloadDoneCh

	// any code here can assume that data download is complete
	fmt.Println("Data download complete, starting data processing...")
}

processData(downloadData())
// Preparing to process data...
// Downloading data file...
// Data download complete, starting data processing...

Assignment
Our Textio server isn't able to boot up until it receives the signal that its databases are all online, and it learns about them being online by waiting for tokens (empty structs) on a channel.

Run the code. It never exits! The channel passed to waitForDBs stays blocked, because it's only popping the first value off the channel.

Fix the waitForDBs function. It should pause execution until it receives a token for every database from the dbChan channel. Each time waitForDBs reads a token, the getDBsChannel goroutine will print a message to the console for you. The succinctly named numDBs input is the total number of databases. Look at the test code to see how these functions are used so you can understand the control flow.







LESSON 4:
Buffered Channels
Channels can optionally be buffered.

Creating a Channel With a Buffer
You can provide a buffer length as the second argument to make() to create a buffered channel:

ch := make(chan int, 100)

A buffer allows the channel to hold a fixed number of values before sending blocks. This means sending on a buffered channel only blocks when the buffer is full, and receiving blocks only when the buffer is empty.

Assignment
We want to be able to send emails in batches. A writing goroutine will write an entire batch of email messages to a buffered channel, and later, once the channel is full, a reading goroutine will read all of the messages from the channel and send them out to our clients.

Complete the addEmailsToQueue function. It should create a buffered channel with a buffer large enough to store all of the emails it's given. It should then write the emails to the channel in order, and finally return the channel.









LESSON 5:
Closing Channels in Go
Channels can be explicitly closed by a sender:

ch := make(chan int)

// do some stuff with the channel

close(ch)

Checking If a Channel Is Closed
Similar to the ok value when accessing data in a map, receivers can check the ok value when receiving from a channel to test if a channel was closed.

v, ok := <-ch

ok is false if the channel is empty and closed.

Don't Send on a Closed Channel
Sending on a closed channel will cause a panic. A panic on the main goroutine will cause the entire program to crash, and a panic in any other goroutine will cause that goroutine to crash.

Closing isn't necessary. There's nothing wrong with leaving channels open, they'll still be garbage collected if they're unused. You should close channels to indicate explicitly to a receiver that nothing else is going to come across.

Assignment
At Textio we're all about keeping track of what our systems are up to with great logging and telemetry.

The sendReports function sends out a batch of reports to our clients and reports back how many were sent across a channel. It closes the channel when it's done.

Complete the countReports function. It should:

Use an infinite for loop to read from the channel:
If the channel is closed, break out of the loop
Otherwise, keep a running total of the number of reports sent
Return the total number of reports sent










LESSON 6:
Range
Similar to slices and maps, channels can be ranged over.

for item := range ch {
    // item is the next value received from the channel
}

This example will receive values over the channel (blocking at each iteration if nothing new is there) and will exit only when the channel is closed.

Assignment
It's that time again, Textio is hiring and we've been assigned to do the interview. The Fibonacci sequence is Textio's interview problem of choice. We've been tasked with building a small toy program we can use in the interview.

Complete the concurrentFib function. It should:

Create a new channel of ints
Call fibonacci concurrently
Use a range loop to read from the channel and append the values to a slice
Return the slice









LESSON 7:
Select
Sometimes we have a single goroutine listening to multiple channels and want to process data in the order it comes through each channel.

A select statement is used to listen to multiple channels at the same time. It is similar to a switch statement but for channels.

select {
case i, ok := <-chInts:
	if ok {
		fmt.Println(i)
	}
case s, ok := <-chStrings:
	if ok {
		fmt.Println(s)
	}
}

The first channel with a value ready to be received will fire and its body will execute. If multiple channels are ready at the same time one is chosen randomly. The ok variable in the example above refers to whether or not the channel has been closed by the sender yet.

Assignment
Complete the logMessages function.

Use an infinite for loop and a select statement to log the emails and sms messages as they come in order across the two channels. Add a condition to return from the function when one of the two channels closes, whichever is first.

Use the logSms and logEmail functions to log the messages.